well howdy there internet people Isabeau
again so tonight we're going to talk
about situational awareness
why because on a recent live stream
somebody asked me to talk about in it's
cool topic the first we have to decide
what it is what is situational awareness
situational awareness is the perception
of environmental elements and events
with respect to time or space the
comprehension of their meaning and the
projection of their future status right
okay that's Inslee's model that's a good
definition if you're going to get really
into this topic and you want to
understand the psychology of it it might
be a little too in-depth for our
purposes though a perhaps simpler
definition would be the constant and
immediate application of deductive
reasoning it allows you to predict
outcomes it's the same thing it's just a
little less wordy the easiest way to
talk about it in describe it is to talk
about it in context so I'm going to tell
you a story and then I'll tell you about
a video that you can watch and you can
actually see people apply situational
awareness in real time and they were not
people who were trying to illustrate it
they just did it
okay a few nights ago it's like 2:30 in
the morning I stopped at a Stuckey's
that's a gas station for those people
outside the South one of those that's
always lit up like a Christmas tree I'm
sitting there pumping gas and this guy
comes out and it's like hey my battery's
dead can you help me out now in my mind
I'm looking at internet I'm like never
seen this dude before my wife now I live
outside of a town of 4,000 people even
if I don't know you I've seen you I'll
recognize you
however we are close to highway mine it
came from their immediate application of
deductive reasoning all of that took
place in my head in a split second what
did I say of course absolutely to which
he replies I'm parked around back in my
mind right let me tell you a story about
picking the wrong one but what I say
okay because through situational
awareness I happen to know that that
parking lot is a loop what runs behind
the gas station comes out the other side
if it is something untoward I can drive
through it
when I get in the truck to pull around I
have two things going back and forth in
my mind the first is the reality
realistically if you are somebody
looking to to rob someone you're looking
for easy prey you're probably not gonna
pick a guy that looks like me number one
I don't look like I have any money
number two I look like I'm dumb enough
to fight back number three I'm a redneck
I mean it's just not probably not the
ideal target the other thing going
through my mind is right around back in
the dark cool I'm gonna get to kick this
dude's teeth out and stuff and then a
dumpster when I make it around the
building I see the car the car is parked
with its front bumper up against
something not looking to make it get
away pull up next to it and before I get
out I look over the driver's side seat
is leaned all the way back so apply
deductive reasoning to that the constant
application of deductive reasoning guy I
don't know near a highway parked in the
dark behind the gas station lit up like
Christmas tree in the middle of the
night and this seats leaned all the way
back pulled off the road pull
off the highway to take a nap left his
lights on parked out back because he
didn't want to be kept awake by the
lights makes sense get out of the car as
I'm talking to a very nice guy that's
exactly what happened that's a clear
demonstration of situational awareness
it's the constant processing of the
information you do it all the time
whether or not you call it that or not
your conclusion changes as you give more
information it's a dynamic process it's
a cycle and if you go to the other
definition you'll see that it's it's a
loop now if you want to watch it in real
time there's a video there's two guys
they're driving down the road and
they're driving down the highway and
they see a kid like - it's cold outside
kids weren't a Viper
and he's in the highway with 18-wheelers
them being good people and not wanting
to see Pet Sematary in real life they
stop they star life's training why
because I would guess they did it
because sometimes people stereotype and
you have a kid who is clearly not where
he's supposed to be who might have been
reported missing it would be a good idea
to have clear evidence that you two
black guys did not kidnap this whole
white baby if you're gonna look for it
that's the term you need to look for for
the video Oh white baby because they
found a whole white baby in the middle
of a road so the kid was walking down
the hill so what do they do they go up
the hill he's probably walking away from
where he's supposed to be maybe an
application of deductive reasoning they
get up there they start knocking on
doors those that they can get to some of
the houses are fenced off they can't
find where the kids supposed to be
they call the cops cops show up and they
tell them what's going on cops like you
know there's a mobile home park down the
road he's probably from there
so for all those people who are like
cops won't stereotype like that mmm I
don't know about that anyway so one of
the guys when the cop says that he's
like no barefoot his feet are clean he
had marked for the immediate application
of deductive reason and it's constant
and you can watch the whole video the
kid is returned safely by the end of it
but and he was not from the mobile home
park it's worth watching because these
guys they didn't set out to demonstrate
situational awareness in real-time but
they did everybody does it in the course
of their daily lives I would suggest
that a lot of times when you get that
feeling that something's not right
subconsciously you have processed
something that has led you to conclude
there's a threat of some kind so you act
on it people want to know how to develop
it because it's used in crisis
situations it becomes really important
the same way you develop any skill you
practice it when you're going about your
daily life be conscious of it the more
conscious of it you are the better you
get at and then eventually it just
becomes the constant and immediate
application of deductive reasoning
you're doing it all the time and when
you're conscious of it you're better at
it you can practice it just walking
around the store looking at people
trying to deduce things you know based
on choose what somebody has clipped to
their belt you know we do it all the
time you know that expression about
first impressions that's all based on
deductive reasoning
situational awareness is just making
that dynamic making it a continual thing
it's it's a skill that if you plan to be
out and about or you plan to be you
don't plan to be in a crisis situation
if you want to be more effective in
stressful situations it's it's a skill
you should hone anyway it's just a
thought now have a good night